notebooks/journal.md, before:



## Day 1

- Surfed though TCIA (The Cancer Imaging Archive) for a proper CT scan dataset
- Decided to use TCGA-COAD, specifically downloading one study from one patient
- Wrote to code to load and correctly order the DICOM files based on anatomical structure and how each DICOM slice has an "Image Position Patient" property
- Correctly looked for L3 slice based on 
An axial CT slice at approximately the L3 vertebral level was selected based on bilateral psoas muscle visualization and confirmed absence of iliac crest structures
- Studied full in-depth explanation into DICOM files: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eLS9nDVJx5Y
- found notes on CT scans and dicom on Nucleo founder's X: https://oil-exhaust-7d6.notion.site/CT-scans-and-dicom-files-1d4ec46124188093a0f8dbc8c1185fc8 
All quantitative analysis was performed in native Hounsfield Unit space, with windowing applied only for visualization.
- pydicom: read series, sort, compute HU volume, extract pixel spacing
- implemented conversion from raw pixel arrays to the Housenfield Unit (HU) which is used to measure the radiodensity of physical tissue
- NumPy: slice extraction, synthetic follow-up generation math, saving .npy
- learned about the types RECIST responses including PD, PR, CR, SD
- find and extract pixel spacing
-  L3 refers to third vertebra in your lower back 
- CSA (cross-sectional muscle area) is the total skeletal muscle area visible in a single slice (i.e. cross section) of that body at the L3 level
- so essentially, instead of scanning the whole body to determine the entire body muscle mass, the standard practice is to find an L3 slice and take a single measurement of that cross section's total muscle area and this can correlate well to assess entire body mass
- we extract pixel spacing to represent how much space a pixel represents in real life (i.e. 0.7 mm x 0.7 mm)
- tldr; built a CT-ingestion pipeline that sorts DICOM slices anatomically, then manually identified L3 slice for assessing body masss, then converted said slice's raw pixel data to HU for actual clinically-relevant tissue informatiom, then extracted physical imaging metadata for conducting downstream clinical tasks

## Day 2

Commit message:

feat: add 3D 40mm slab around L3 slice

notebooks/journal.md, after:



## Day 1

- Surfed though TCIA (The Cancer Imaging Archive) for a proper CT scan dataset
- Decided to use TCGA-COAD, specifically downloading one study from one patient
- Wrote to code to load and correctly order the DICOM files based on anatomical structure and how each DICOM slice has an "Image Position Patient" property
- found the L3 slice by finding the level where both psoas muscles are visible, before the iliac crest appears
- Studied full in-depth explanation into DICOM files: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eLS9nDVJx5Y
- found notes on CT scans and dicom on Nucleo founder's X: https://oil-exhaust-7d6.notion.site/CT-scans-and-dicom-files-1d4ec46124188093a0f8dbc8c1185fc8 
All quantitative analysis was performed in native Hounsfield Unit space, with windowing applied only for visualization.
- pydicom: read series, sort, compute HU volume, extract pixel spacing
- implemented conversion from raw pixel arrays to the Housenfield Unit (HU) which is used to measure the radiodensity of physical tissue
- NumPy: slice extraction, synthetic follow-up generation math, saving .npy
- learned about the types RECIST responses including PD, PR, CR, SD
- find and extract pixel spacing
- L3 refers to third vertebra in my lower back (lumbar spine) - includes major muscle groups (i.e. psoas - pronounced so-as, paraspinals, abdominal wall)
- CSA (cross-sectional muscle area) is the total skeletal muscle area visible in a single slice (i.e. cross section) of that body at the L3 level
- so essentially, instead of scanning the whole body to determine the entire body muscle mass, the standard practice is to find an L3 slice and take a single measurement of that cross section's total muscle area and this can correlate well to assess entire body mass
- we extract pixel spacing to represent how much space a pixel represents in real life (i.e. 0.7 mm x 0.7 mm)
- tldr; built a CT-ingestion pipeline that sorts DICOM slices anatomically, then manually identified L3 slice for assessing body masss, then converted said slice's raw pixel data to HU for actual clinically-relevant tissue informatiom, then extracted physical imaging metadata for conducting downstream clinical tasks

## Day 2

- sarcopenia is loss of skeletal muscle mass
- in cancer patients, bmi and weight (standard metrics) are not enough -> need to look at muscle mass and body composition
- use body comp to discern between skeletal muscle and fat (visceral fat and subcutaneous fat) - these are specific biomarkers
- validated HU range in L3 slice seeing minimum of -2048 HU and max 1466 HU 
- use total segmentator : https://github.com/wasserth/TotalSegmentator
- perform tissue segmentation on a localized L3 region rather than the full CT volume to reflect standard sarcopenia assessment protocols
- created a 3d slab around the L3 slice ~40 slices at 1mm thickness each
